email from self to professor [31 oct 2024]

As you’ll recall from our meeting and my abstract, I proposed to explore the materiality of social media on smartphones, and including a critique of ANT in the form of the PANT framework. But inspired by today’s class and its readings, I have decided to focus more clearly on the phones themselves, as material objects. I have been devising some tangents about this, which I would like to promo to you as a teaser for the actual essay. I hope that this is alright, even if the abstract deadline has passed!

As you’ll see, power (of the capitalist firm variety) plays a crucial role in the materiality of smartphones. Firstly, the design of smartphones has ramifications for how they are used: the iPhone 7 omitted the headphone jack and all other major manufacturers followed suit, making it a) mandatory to use bluetooth headphones or USB-C headphones or, worse, b) to play audio in public spaces like the subway or the doctor’s waiting room. Secondly, batteries are now soldered onto the frame, lessening the lifetime usability of a phone. Thirdly, planned obsolescence also contributes to point two. The connecting thread is that these design choices, applied basically uniformly, produce more profits for the corporations which oversee the production and (often) sale of these phones.

Following directly from these points, I will talk about the manufacturing and disposal processes of the phones. Their short lifespan, far shorter than what is technically possible, leads to mounds of e-waste, much of which ends up in African coastal countries such as the Ivory Coast. Their processing there with no specialized equipment, as a source of rare earth minerals, has severe health consequences on the local populations. Secondly, the bleak factory conditions (e.g. displayed by Foxconn (Apple) in China) make for dismal working lives for the people who assemble these increasingly indispensable (but not literally, as they are in fact, dispensed) devices.

Finally, I will discuss the ways in which the smartphone has become embedded into everyday life in Western/Global North countries. Here I will draw on intransigence, as now that many of our crucial infrastructures have been renewed to accommodate the smartphone, there is little space to maneuver if one chooses not to use one. Here I draw on the controversial Ted Kaczynski, who said that ”new technology changes society in such a way that people eventually find themselves FORCED to use it”. 

email from professor to self [1 nov 2024]

That sounds good -- please go ahead! My one worry is that you might be taking a lot of different issues here, which may mean sacrificing space and depth to discuss each? Otherwise, this sounds good to me.
