"Everything Now"

named after the Arcade Fire album and song from 2017; full title TBD

[introduction - power-actor-network theory - design - manufacturing - disposal - conclusion]

A. The Power of Power-Actor-Network Theory
B. Less Is More: Power in Design
C. Not Made in California
D. Last Stop [alt1: The End is Never The End; alt2: The Buck Does Not Stop Here]

Introduction
	The modern world is defined by its citizens' reliance on internet-enabled cell phones--smartphones. This is particularly, but not exclusively, the case in those societies broadly conceived of as comprising the "Global North" (shortened as 'the North' in this paper)--places such as the United Kingdom (UK), Luxembourg, and New Zealand. The societal and cultural signifcance of these phones has reached such an extent that their use holds relevance in many aspects of life in the North: such indispensable aspects of modern life as unlocking the door to one's flat, taking public transportation, and checking in to a medical appointment are increasingly handled through the use of a smartphone. This raises the question: what hidden or at least underacknowledged aspects are embedded into the design, manufacture, and disposal of smartphones? This is the question I aim to tackle, at least in part, in this paper. 
	The paper's  theoretical framework is an experimental one. Drawing on two vast groups of sources--Latourian actor-network theory (ANT) and critical conceptualizations of the political economy--not in opposition to one another but as complementary resources, this paper presents a conciliatory yet--I claim--insightful approach called 'power-actor-network theory' (PANT). The paper begins with necessary, initial remarks about the implications of combining these two schools of thought ('A. The Power of Power-Actor-Network Theory'). Next, the paper focuses closely on particular design choices made by smartphone manufacturers, including the omissions of a physical keyboard--when, in 2007, the current paradigm of smartphones was launched by Apple, replacing its predecessors and rivals, Finnish Nokia and Canadian Research In Motion (Blackberry)--and the 3.5 millimeter headphone jack, also spearheaded by Apple ('B. Less Is More: Power in Design'). Third, the paper moves to discussing the impact of the complete transfer of phone manufacturing to Global South countries (as with the North, also referred to as 'the South' in this paper) with the definite consequence of boosting the financial viability of technology companies largely based in the North ('C. Not Made in California'). Although the logical next step would be to discuss the use of smartphones next, in the interest of word space, I will leave this 'ghost chapter' for other academics to create; instead, we move in the last part directly to 'the final site of disposal' (Finnish: loppusijoituspaikka): the many, varied--yet invariably Southern--places where we find smartphones at the end of their life cycles. This chapter ('D. Last Stop') discusses the medically discernible, human ramifications of planned obsolescence on the citizens of 'developing countries' (Finnish: kehittyvät maat), otherwise here discussed as the South.

A. The Power of Power-Actor-Network Theory
	At the start of this initial, theory-heavy section, I would be remiss to brush over my intentions with the framework I intend to use as the paper's primary explanatory engine. While ANT points certainly to a well-known, well-worn set of scholarship and its thinkers--such as Bruno Latour, Madeleine Akrich, and John Law, among others--I find the direct usefulness of the works of this coalition to be rather limited. But in an effort not to 'throw the baby out with the bathwater,' I want to stress at the same time that there are aspects of this scholarship which ought to be carried into the future, albeit strengthened by a clear understanding of the social scientific relevance of power. There seems to be an outright reluctance on the part of ANT scholars to consider how the theories could actually improve by an explicit inclusion of power. The extent to which people in this tradition strike me as either wilfully or naively ignorant of the existence of power relations within society--also known as a "socio-technical system"--is uncomfortably high.
	What is 'power,' anyway? For this paper, I'm interested in focusing on power in the neoliberal temporal context; power which arises from the growing relevance of corporations in affecting change in societies. Because of this, I cannot go very far without mentioning Karl Marx, whose evocative conceptualization of social life as basically consisting of a "sometimes visible, sometimes hidden" struggle between classes is useful in unpacking the social scaffolding around smartphones. By this 'scaffolding,' I mean specifically the necessary yet unfortunately underexamined aspects of smartphones (coincidentally presented in this paper in a receding order of public attention): design, manufacturing, and disposal. The purpose of this undertaking is to provide much-needed context about smartphones in an age where they are becoming both a significant tool for most people in the North and an insightful focal point for researchers of society.

B. Less Is More: Power in Design [omitting keyboards made a more addictive format vis-a-vis 'CrackBerry'; omitting headphone jacks made the use of Bluetooth headphones, if not necessary, then socially meritable; planned obsolesence (PO) increased sales artificially at ecological cost]

C. Not Made in California [phones used to be manufactured in GN; their manufacture in GS allows for inhumane conditions due to differences in labor legislation]

D. Last Stop [alt1: The End is Never The End; alt2: The Buck Does Not Stop Here] [PO, marketing pressures, and manufactured but not technologically necessary changes (e.g. shutdown of 2/3G networks which renders older phones unusable) users to abandon phones before their 'natural' endpoint; they largely get shipped to GS communities, such as Agbobloshie, where they start to comprise e-graveyards; the smelting of these phones causes underacknowledged health hazards for locals]

Conclusion
	Future research papers on the topic of smartphones could make use of the PANT framework to get at the connection between materiality and the social context which it necessitates. I hope the reader appreciates that this paper has focused on exactly the inverse of what e.g. a Latourian analysis does: here we see much of the ignored but necessary aspects of the life of a smartphone. 

References [tentative; Harvard formatting]
Holgate, P. (2017) The model for recycling our old smartphones is actually causing massive pollution, Vox. Available at: https://www.vox.com/2017/11/8/16621512/where-does-my-smartphone-iphone-8-x-go-recycling-afterlife-toxic-waste-environment (Accessed: 13 November 2024). 
Latour, B. (1990). Technology is Society Made Durable. The Sociological Review, 38(1_suppl), 103–131. doi:10.1111/j.1467-954x.1990.tb03350.x
McNish, J. and Silcoff, S. (2016) Losing the signal: The untold story behind the extraordinary rise and spectacular fall of Blackberry. New York, NY: Flatiron Books. 
